<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Poetry</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="tamerlane" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Tamerlane<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></h2>
			<p>
				<span>Kind solace in a dying hour!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Such, father, is not (now) my theme⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will not madly deem that power</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of Earth may shrive me of the sin</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Unearthly pride hath revelled in⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I have no time to dote or dream:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You call it hope⁠—that fire of fire!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is but agony of desire:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If I <em>can</em> hope⁠—O God! I can⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its fount is holier⁠—more divine⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I would not call thee fool, old man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But such is not a gift of thine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Know thou the secret of a spirit</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bowed from its wild pride into shame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O yearning heart! I did inherit</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy withering portion with the fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The searing glory which hath shone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amid the Jewels of my throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Halo of Hell! and with a pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not Hell shall make me fear again⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O craving heart, for the lost flowers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sunshine of my summer hours!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Th’ undying voice of that dead time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With its interminable chime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rings, in the spirit of a spell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon thy emptiness⁠—a knell.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I have not always been as now:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fever’d diadem on my brow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I claimed and won usurpingly⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath not the same fierce heirdom given</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rome to the Caesar⁠—this to me?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The heritage of a kingly mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a proud spirit which hath striven</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Triumphantly with human kind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On mountain soil I first drew life:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The mists of the Taglay have shed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nightly their dews upon my head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, I believe, the wingèd strife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tumult of the headlong air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have nestled in my very hair.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So late from Heaven⁠—that dew⁠—it fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(’Mid dreams of an unholy night)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon me with the touch of Hell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While the red flashing of the light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From clouds that hung, like banners, o’er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Appeared to my half-closing eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The pageantry of monarchy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the deep trumpet-thunder’s roar</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Came hurriedly upon me, telling</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of human battle, where my voice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My own voice, silly child!⁠—was swelling</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">(O! how my spirit would rejoice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leap within me at the cry)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The battle-cry of Victory!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The rain came down upon my head</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unsheltered⁠—and the heavy wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rendered me mad and deaf and blind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was but man, I thought, who shed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Laurels upon me: and the rush⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The torrent of the chilly air</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gurgled within my ear the crush</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of empires⁠—with the captive’s prayer⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hum of suitors⁠—and the tone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of flattery ’round a sovereign’s throne.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>My passions, from that hapless hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Usurped a tyranny which men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have deemed since I have reached to power;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">My innate nature⁠—be it so:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, father, there liv’d one who, then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then⁠—in my boyhood⁠—when their fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Burned with a still intenser glow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(For passion must, with youth, expire)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">E’en <em>then</em> who knew this iron heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In woman’s weakness had a part.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I have no words⁠—alas!⁠—to tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The loveliness of loving well!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor would I now attempt to trace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The more than beauty of a face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose lineaments, upon my mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are ⸻ shadows on th’ unstable wind:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus I remember having dwelt</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Some page of early lore upon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With loitering eye, till I have felt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The letters⁠—with their meaning⁠—melt</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To fantasies⁠—with none.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O, she was worthy of all love!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love as in infancy was mine⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas such as angel minds above</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might envy; her young heart the shrine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On which my ev’ry hope and thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were incense⁠—then a goodly gift,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">For they were childish and upright⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pure⁠—as her young example taught:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Why did I leave it, and, adrift,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Trust to the fire within, for light?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>We grew in age⁠—and love⁠—together⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Roaming the forest, and the wild;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My breast her shield in wintry weather⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, when the friendly sunshine smiled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she would mark the opening skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span><em>I</em> saw no Heaven⁠—but in her eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Young Love’s first lesson is⁠—the heart:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For ’mid that sunshine, and those smiles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When, from our little cares apart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And laughing at her girlish wiles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’d throw me on her throbbing breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And pour my spirit out in tears⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was no need to speak the rest⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No need to quiet any fears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of her⁠—who asked no reason why,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But turned on me her quiet eye!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet <em>more</em> than worthy of the love</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My spirit struggled with, and strove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When, on the mountain peak, alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ambition lent it a new tone⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I had no being⁠—but in thee:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The world, and all it did contain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the earth⁠—the air⁠—the sea⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Its joy⁠—its little lot of pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That was new pleasure⁠—the ideal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dim, vanities of dreams by night⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dimmer nothings which were real⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Shadows⁠—and a more shadowy light!)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Parted upon their misty wings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And, so, confusedly, became</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Thine image, and⁠—a name⁠—a name!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two separate⁠—yet most intimate things.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I was ambitious⁠—have you known</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The passion, father? You have not:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cottager, I marked a throne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of half the world as all my own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And murmured at such lowly lot⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, just like any other dream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Upon the vapour of the dew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My own had past, did not the beam</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of beauty which did while it thro’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The minute⁠—the hour⁠—the day⁠—oppress</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My mind with double loveliness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We walk’d together on the crown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a high mountain which looked down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Afar from its proud natural towers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of rock and forest, on the hills⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dwindled hills! begirt with bowers</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And shouting with a thousand rills.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I spoke to her of power and pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But mystically⁠—in such guise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That she might deem it naught beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The moment’s converse; in her eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I read, perhaps too carelessly⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A mingled feeling with my own⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flush on her bright cheek, to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seemed to become a queenly throne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too well that I should let it be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Light in the wilderness alone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I wrapped myself in grandeur then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And donned a visionary crown⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet it was not that Fantasy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Had thrown her mantle over me⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that, among the rabble⁠—men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Lion ambition is chained down⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And crouches to a keeper’s hand⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not so in deserts where the grand⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wild⁠—the terrible conspire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With their own breath to fan his fire.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Look ’round thee now on Samarcand!⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is not she queen of Earth? her pride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above all cities? in her hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their destinies? in all beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of glory which the world hath known</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stands she not nobly and alone?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Falling⁠—her veriest stepping-stone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall form the pedestal of a throne⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And who her sovereign? Timour⁠—he</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whom the astonished people saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Striding o’er empires haughtily</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A diademed outlaw!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O, human love! thou spirit given,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On Earth, of all we hope in Heaven!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which fall’st into the soul like rain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the Siroc-withered plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, failing in thy power to bless</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But leav’st the heart a wilderness!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Idea! which bindest life around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With music of so strange a sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And beauty of so wild a birth⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Farewell! for I have won the Earth.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When Hope, the eagle that towered, could see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No cliff beyond him in the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His pinions were bent droopingly⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And homeward turned his softened eye.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas sunset: when the sun will part</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There comes a sullenness of heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To him who still would look upon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glory of the summer sun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That soul will hate the ev’ning mist,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So often lovely, and will list</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the sound of the coming darkness (known</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To those whose spirits hearken) as one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, in a dream of night, <em>would</em> fly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But <em>cannot</em>, from a danger nigh.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What tho’ the moon⁠—tho’ the white moon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shed all the splendour of her noon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span><em>Her</em> smile is chilly⁠—and <em>her</em> beam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In that time of dreariness, will seem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(So like you gather in your breath)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A portrait taken after death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And boyhood in a summer sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose waning is the dreariest one⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For all we live to know is known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all we seek to keep hath flown⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let life, then, as the day-flower, fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the noonday beauty⁠—which is all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I reach’d my home⁠—my home no more⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For all had flown who made it so.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I passed from out its mossy door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And, tho’ my tread was soft and low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A voice came from the threshold stone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of one whom I had earlier known⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O! I defy thee, Hell, to show</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On beds of fire that burn below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A humbler heart⁠—a deeper woe.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Father, I firmly do believe⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I <em>know</em>⁠—for Death, who comes for me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">From regions of the blest afar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where there is nothing to deceive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Hath left his iron gate ajar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And rays of truth you cannot see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are flashing thro’ Eternity⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I do believe that Eblis hath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A snare in every human path⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Else how, when in the holy grove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I wandered of the idol, Love⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who daily scents his snowy wings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With incense of burnt-offerings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the most unpolluted things,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose pleasant bowers are yet so riven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above with trellised rays from Heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No mote may shun⁠—no tiniest fly⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The light’ning of his eagle eye⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How was it that Ambition crept,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Unseen, amid the revels there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till growing bold, he laughed and leapt</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the tangles of Love’s very hair?</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="song" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Song</h2>
			<p>
				<span>I saw thee on thy bridal day⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When a burning blush came o’er thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though happiness around thee lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The world all love before thee:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And in thine eye a kindling light</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Whatever it might be)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was all on Earth my aching sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of Loveliness could see.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That blush, perhaps, was maiden shame⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As such it well may pass⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though its glow hath raised a fiercer flame</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the breast of him, alas!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Who saw thee on that bridal day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When that deep blush <em>would</em> come o’er thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though happiness around thee lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The world all love before thee.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="dreams" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Dreams</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Oh! that my young life were a lasting dream!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My spirit not awakening, till the beam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of an Eternity should bring the morrow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yes! though that long dream were of hopeless sorrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twere better than the cold reality</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of waking life, to him whose heart must be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hath been still, on the lovely earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A chaos of deep passion, from his birth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But should it be⁠—that dream eternally</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Continuing⁠—as dreams have been to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In my young boyhood⁠—should it thus be given,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twere folly still to hope for higher Heaven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For I have revelled when the sun was bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ the summer sky, in dreams of living light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And loveliness⁠—have left my very heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inclines of my imaginary apart<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2" id="noteref-2" epub:type="noteref">2</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>From mine own home, with beings that have been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of mine own thought⁠—what more could I have seen?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas once⁠—and only once⁠—and the wild hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From my remembrance shall not pass⁠—some power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or spell had bound me⁠—’twas the chilly wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came o’er me in the night, and left behind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its image on my spirit⁠—or the moon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shone on my slumbers in her lofty noon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too coldly⁠—or the stars⁠—howe’er it was</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That dream was as that night-wind⁠—let it pass.</span>
				<br/>
				<span><em>I have been</em> happy⁠—though in a dream.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have been happy⁠—and I love the theme:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dreams! in their vivid colouring of life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As in that fleeting, shadowy, misty strife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of semblance with reality which brings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the delirious eye, more lovely things</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Paradise and Love⁠—and all my own!⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than young Hope in his sunniest hour hath known.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="spirits-of-the-dead" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Spirits of the Dead</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Thy soul shall find itself alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Mid dark thoughts of the gray tombstone⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not one, of all the crowd, to pry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into thine hour of secrecy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be silent in that solitude</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which is not loneliness⁠—for then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spirits of the dead who stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In life before thee are again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In death around thee⁠—and their will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall then overshadow thee: be still.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the night⁠—tho’ clear⁠—shall frown⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the stars shall look not down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From their high thrones in the Heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With light like Hope to mortals given⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But their red orbs, without beam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thy weariness shall seem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a burning and a fever</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which would cling to thee forever:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now are thoughts thou shalt not banish⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now are visions ne’er to vanish⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From thy spirit shall they pass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No more⁠—like dew-drops from the grass.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The breeze⁠—the breath of God⁠—is still⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the mist upon the hill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shadowy⁠—shadowy⁠—yet unbroken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is a symbol and a token⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How it hangs upon the trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mystery of mysteries!⁠—</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="evening-star" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Evening Star</h2>
			<p>
				<span>’Twas noontide of summer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And midtime of night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stars, in their orbits,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shone pale, through the light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the brighter, cold moon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Mid planets her slaves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Herself in the Heavens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her beam on the waves.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">I gazed awhile</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On her cold smile;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too cold⁠—too cold for me⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There passed, as a shroud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A fleecy cloud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I turned away to thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Proud Evening Star,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In thy glory afar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dearer thy beam shall be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For joy to my heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is the proud part</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou bearest in Heaven at night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And more I admire</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy distant fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than that colder, lowly light.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="imitation" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Imitation</h2>
			<p>
				<span>A dark unfathomed tide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of interminable pride⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mystery, and a dream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should my early life seem;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I say that dream was fraught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a wild and waking thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of beings that have been,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which my spirit hath not seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had I let them pass me by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a dreaming eye!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let none of earth inherit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That vision on my spirit;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those thoughts I would control,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a spell upon his soul:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For that bright hope at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that light time have past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And my worldly rest hath gone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a sigh as it passed on:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I care not though it perish</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a thought I then did cherish.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="stanzas" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Stanzas</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>How often we forget all time, when lone</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Admiring Nature’s universal throne;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her woods⁠—her wilds⁠—her mountains⁠—the intense</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Reply of Hers to Our intelligence!</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<section id="stanzas-1">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>
					<span>In youth I have known one with whom the Earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In secret communing held⁠—as he with it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In daylight, and in beauty, from his birth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose fervid, flickering torch of life was lit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the sun and stars, whence he had drawn forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A passionate light such for his spirit was fit⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet that spirit knew⁠—not in the hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of its own fervor⁠—what had o’er it power.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanzas-2">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Perhaps it may be that my mind is wrought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To a fever by the moonbeam that hangs o’er,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I will half believe that wild light fraught</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With more of sovereignty than ancient lore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath ever told⁠—or is it of a thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The unembodied essence, and no more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That with a quickening spell doth o’er us pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As dew of the night-time, o’er the summer grass?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanzas-3">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Doth o’er us pass, when, as th’ expanding eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To the loved object⁠—so the tear to the lid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will start, which lately slept in apathy?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet it need not be⁠—(that object) hid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From us in life⁠—but common⁠—which doth lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each hour before us⁠—but then only bid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a strange sound, as of a harp-string broken</span>
					<br/>
					<span>T’ awake us⁠—’Tis a symbol and a token⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanzas-4">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Of what in other worlds shall be⁠—and given</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In beauty by our God, to those alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who otherwise would fall from life and Heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drawn by their heart’s passion, and that tone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That high tone of the spirit which hath striven</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though not with Faith⁠—with godliness⁠—whose throne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With desperate energy ’t hath beaten down;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wearing its own deep feeling as a crown.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</article>
		<article id="a-dream" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Dream</h2>
			<p>
				<span>In visions of the dark night</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I have dreamed of joy departed⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But a waking dream of life and light</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hath left me broken-hearted.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ah! what is not a dream by day</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To him whose eyes are cast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On things around him with a ray</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Turned back upon the past?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That holy dream⁠—that holy dream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While all the world were chiding,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath cheered me as a lovely beam</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A lonely spirit guiding.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What though that light, thro’ storm and night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So trembled from afar⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What could there be more purely bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In Truth’s day-star?</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-happiest-day" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Happiest Day</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The happiest day⁠—the happiest hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My seared and blighted heart hath known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The highest hope of pride and power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I feel hath flown.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Of power! said I? Yes! such I ween</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But they have vanished long, alas!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The visions of my youth have been⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But let them pass.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And pride, what have I now with thee?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Another brow may ev’n inherit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The venom thou hast poured on me⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Be still my spirit!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The happiest day⁠—the happiest hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mine eyes shall see⁠—have ever seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brightest glance of pride and power</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I feet have been:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But were that hope of pride and power</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now offered with the pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ev’n <em>then</em> I felt⁠—that brightest hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I would not live again:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For on its wing was dark alloy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And as it fluttered⁠—fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An essence⁠—powerful to destroy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A soul that knew it well.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-lake" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Lake</h2>
			<p>
				<span>In spring of youth it was my lot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To haunt of the wide world a spot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The which I could not love the less⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So lovely was the loneliness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a wild lake, with black rock bound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the tall pines that towered around.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But when the Night had thrown her pall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon that spot, as upon all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the mystic wind went by</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Murmuring in melody⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then⁠—ah, then, I would awake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the terror of the lone lake.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet that terror was not fright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But a tremulous delight⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A feeling not the jewelled mine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could teach or bribe me to define⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor Love⁠—although the Love were thine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Death was in that poisonous wave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in its gulf a fitting grave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For him who thence could solace bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To his lone imagining⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose solitary soul could make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An Eden of that dim lake.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-the-river" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To the River ⸻</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Fair river! in thy bright, clear flow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of crystal, wandering water,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou art an emblem of the glow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of beauty⁠—the unhidden heart⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The playful maziness of art</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In old Alberto’s daughter;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But when within thy wave she looks⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which glistens then, and trembles⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why, then, the prettiest of brooks</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her worshipper resembles;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For in my heart, as in thy stream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her image deeply lies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His heart which trembles at the beam</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of her soul-searching eyes.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="alone" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Alone</h2>
			<p>
				<span>From childhood’s hour I have not been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As others were⁠—I have not seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As others saw⁠—I could not bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My passions from a common spring⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the same source I have not taken</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My sorrow⁠—I could not awaken</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My heart to joy at the same tone⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all I loved⁠—<em>I</em> loved alone⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span><em>Thou</em>⁠—in my childhood⁠—in the dawn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a most stormy life⁠—was drawn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From every depth of good and ill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mystery which binds me still⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the torrent, or the fountain⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the red cliff of the mountain⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the sun that round me roll’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In its autumn tint of gold⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the lightning in the sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As it passed me flying by⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the thunder, and the storm⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the cloud that took the form</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(When the rest of Heaven was blue)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a demon in my view.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="sonnet-to-science" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Sonnet⁠—To Science</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Science! true daughter of Old Time thou art!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who alterest all things with thy peering eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why preyest thou thus upon the poet’s heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Vulture, whose wings are dull realities?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How should he love thee? or how deem thee wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who wouldst not leave him in his wandering</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To seek for treasure in the jewelled skies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Albeit he soared with an undaunted wing?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast thou not dragged Diana from her car?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And driven the Hamadryad from the wood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To seek a shelter in some happier star?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hast thou not torn the Naiad from her flood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Elfin from the green grass, and from me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The summer dream beneath the tamarind tree?</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="an-acrostic" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">An Acrostic</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Elizabeth it is in vain you say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Love not”⁠—thou sayest it in so sweet a way:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In vain those words from thee or <abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:personal-name">L. E. L.</abbr></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Zantippe’s talents had enforced so well:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah! if that language from thy heart arise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Breathe it less gently forth⁠—and veil thine eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Endymion, recollect, when Luna tried</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To cure his love⁠—was cured of all beside⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His folly⁠—pride⁠—and passion⁠—for he died.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="elizabeth" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Elizabeth</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Elizabeth⁠—it surely is most fit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>[Logic and common usage so commanding]</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In thy own book that <em>first</em> thy name be writ,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Zeno<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3" id="noteref-3" epub:type="noteref">3</a> and other sages notwithstanding;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And <em>I</em> have other reasons for so doing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Besides my innate love of contradiction;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each poet⁠—<em>if</em> a poet⁠—in pursuing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The muses thro’ their bowers of Truth or Fiction,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has studied very little of his part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Read nothing, written less⁠—in short ’s a fool</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Endued with neither soul, nor sense, nor art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Being ignorant of one important rule,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Employed in even the theses of the school⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Called⁠—I forget the heathenish Greek name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>[Called anything, its meaning is the same]</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Always write <em>first</em> things uppermost in the heart.”</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="al-aaraaf" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Al Aaraaf<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4" id="noteref-4" epub:type="noteref">4</a></h2>
			<section id="al-aaraaf-1">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>
					<span>O! nothing earthly save the ray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Thrown back from flowers) of Beauty’s eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As in those gardens where the day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Springs from the gems of Circassy⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O! nothing earthly save the thrill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of melody in woodland rill⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or (music of the passion-hearted)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Joy’s voice so peacefully departed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That like the murmur in the shell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its echo dwelleth and will dwell⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O! nothing of the dross of ours⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet all the beauty⁠—all the flowers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That list our Love, and deck our bowers⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adorn yon world afar, afar⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wandering star.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">’Twas a sweet time for Nesace⁠—for there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her world lay lolling on the golden air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Near four bright suns⁠—a temporary rest⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An oasis in desert of the blest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Away⁠—away⁠—’mid seas of rays that roll</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Empyrean splendor o’er th’ unchained soul⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The soul that scarce (the billows are so dense)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can struggle to its destin’d eminence⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To distant spheres, from time to time, she rode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And late to ours, the favour’d one of God⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, now, the ruler of an anchor’d realm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She throws aside the sceptre⁠—leaves the helm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, amid incense and high spiritual hymns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Laves in quadruple light her angel limbs.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Now happiest, loveliest in yon lovely Earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence sprang the “Idea of Beauty” into birth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Falling in wreaths thro’ many a startled star,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like woman’s hair ’mid pearls, until, afar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It lit on hills Achaian, and there dwelt),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She look’d into Infinity⁠—and knelt.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rich clouds, for canopies, about her curled⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fit emblems of the model of her world⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seen but in beauty⁠—not impeding sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of other beauty glittering thro’ the light⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wreath that twined each starry form around,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the opal’d air in color bound.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">All hurriedly she knelt upon a bed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of flowers: of lilies such as rear’d the head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the fair Capo Deucato,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5" id="noteref-5" epub:type="noteref">5</a> and sprang</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So eagerly around about to hang</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the flying footsteps of⁠—deep pride⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of her who lov’d a mortal⁠—and so died.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6" id="noteref-6" epub:type="noteref">6</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Sephalica, budding with young bees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Uprear’d its purple stem around her knees:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gemmy flower, of Trebizond misnam’d⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7" id="noteref-7" epub:type="noteref">7</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inmate of highest stars, where erst it sham’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All other loveliness: its honied dew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(The fabled nectar that the heathen knew)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deliriously sweet, was dropp’d from Heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fell on gardens of the unforgiven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Trebizond⁠—and on a sunny flower</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So like its own above that, to this hour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It still remaineth, torturing the bee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With madness, and unwonted reverie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Heaven, and all its environs, the leaf</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And blossom of the fairy plant, in grief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Disconsolate linger⁠—grief that hangs her head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Repenting follies that full long have fled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heaving her white breast to the balmy air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like guilty beauty, chasten’d, and more fair:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nyctanthes too, as sacred as the light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She fears to perfume, perfuming the night:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Clytia<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-8" id="noteref-8" epub:type="noteref">8</a> pondering between many a sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While pettish tears adown her petals run:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that aspiring flower that sprang on Earth⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-9" id="noteref-9" epub:type="noteref">9</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And died, ere scarce exalted into birth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bursting its odorous heart in spirit to wing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its way to Heaven, from garden of a king:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Valisnerian lotus thither flown<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-10" id="noteref-10" epub:type="noteref">10</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>From struggling with the waters of the Rhone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thy most lovely purple perfume, Zante!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-11" id="noteref-11" epub:type="noteref">11</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<i xml:lang="it">Isola d’oro!⁠—Fior di Levante!</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the Nelumbo bud that floats forever<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-12" id="noteref-12" epub:type="noteref">12</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Indian Cupid down the holy river⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair flowers, and fairy! to whose care is given</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bear the Goddess’ song, in odors up to Heaven:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-13" id="noteref-13" epub:type="noteref">13</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i4">“Spirit! that dwellest where,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">In the deep sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">The terrible and fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">In beauty vie!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Beyond the line of blue⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">The boundary of the star</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Which turneth at the view</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Of thy barrier and thy bar⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Of the barrier overgone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">By the comets who were cast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">From their pride, and from their throne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">To be drudges till the last⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">To be carriers of fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">(The red fire of their heart)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">With speed that may not tire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">And with pain that shall not part⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Who livest⁠—<em>that</em> we know⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">In Eternity⁠—we feel⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">But the shadow of whose brow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">What spirit shall reveal?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Tho’ the beings whom thy Nesace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Thy messenger hath known</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Have dream’d for thy Infinity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">A model of their own⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-14" id="noteref-14" epub:type="noteref">14</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Thy will is done, O, God!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">The star hath ridden high</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Thro’ many a tempest, but she rode</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Beneath thy burning eye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">And here, in thought, to thee⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">In thought that can alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Ascend thy empire and so be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">A partner of thy throne⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">By wingèd Fantasy,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-15" id="noteref-15" epub:type="noteref">15</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">My embassy is given,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Till secrecy shall knowledge be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">In the environs of Heaven.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She ceas’d⁠—and buried then her burning cheek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Abash’d, amid the lilies there, to seek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A shelter from the fervour of His eye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the stars trembled at the Deity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She stirr’d not⁠—breath’d not⁠—for a voice was there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How solemnly pervading the calm air!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sound of silence on the startled ear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which dreamy poets name “the music of the sphere.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ours is a world of words: Quiet we call</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Silence”⁠—which is the merest word of all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All Nature speaks, and ev’n ideal things</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flap shadowy sounds from visionary wings⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ah! not so when, thus, in realms on high</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The eternal voice of God is passing by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the red winds are withering in the sky!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">“What tho’ in worlds which sightless cycles run,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-16" id="noteref-16" epub:type="noteref">16</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Link’d to a little system, and one sun⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where all my love is folly, and the crowd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still think my terrors but the thunder cloud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The storm, the earthquake, and the ocean-wrath⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Ah! will they cross me in my angrier path?)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What tho’ in worlds which own a single sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sands of Time grow dimmer as they run,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet thine is my resplendency, so given</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bear my secrets thro’ the upper Heaven.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leave tenantless thy crystal home, and fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all thy train, athwart the moony sky⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Apart⁠—like fire-flies in Sicilian night,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-17" id="noteref-17" epub:type="noteref">17</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wing to other worlds another light!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Divulge the secrets of thy embassy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the proud orbs that twinkle⁠—and so be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To ev’ry heart a barrier and a ban</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lest the stars totter in the guilt of man!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Up rose the maiden in the yellow night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The single-moonèd eve!⁠—on Earth we plight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our faith to one love⁠—and one moon adore⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The birth-place of young Beauty had no more.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As sprang that yellow star from downy hours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up rose the maiden from her shrine of flowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bent o’er sheeny mountain and dim plain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her way⁠—but left not yet her Therasæan reign.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-18" id="noteref-18" epub:type="noteref">18</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="al-aaraaf-2">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>
					<span>High on a mountain of enamell’d head⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as the drowsy shepherd on his bed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of giant pasturage lying at his ease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Raising his heavy eyelid, starts and sees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With many a mutter’d “hope to be forgiven”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What time the moon is quadrated in Heaven⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of rosy head, that towering far away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the sunlit ether, caught the ray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of sunken suns at eve⁠—at noon of night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While the moon danc’d with the fair stranger light⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Uprear’d upon such height arose a pile</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of gorgeous columns on th’ unburthen’d air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flashing from Parian marble that twin smile</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far down upon the wave that sparkled there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And nursled the young mountain in its lair.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of molten stars their pavement, such as fall<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-19" id="noteref-19" epub:type="noteref">19</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thro’ the ebon air, besilvering the pall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of their own dissolution, while they die⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adorning then the dwellings of the sky.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A dome, by linkèd light from Heaven let down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sat gently on these columns as a crown⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A window of one circular diamond, there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look’d out above into the purple air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rays from God shot down that meteor chain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hallow’d all the beauty twice again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save when, between th’ Empyrean and that ring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some eager spirit flapp’d his dusky wing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But on the pillars Seraph eyes have seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dimness of this world: that greyish green</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Nature loves the best for Beauty’s grave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lurk’d in each cornice, round each architrave⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every sculptur’d cherub thereabout</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That from his marble dwelling peerèd out,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seem’d earthly in the shadow of his niche⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Achaian statues in a world so rich?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Friezes from Tadmor and Persepolis⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-20" id="noteref-20" epub:type="noteref">20</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Balbec, and the stilly, clear abyss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of beautiful Gomorrah! Oh, the wave<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-21" id="noteref-21" epub:type="noteref">21</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is now upon thee⁠—but too late to save!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Sound loves to revel in a summer night:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Witness the murmur of the grey twilight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That stole upon the ear, in Eyraco,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-22" id="noteref-22" epub:type="noteref">22</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of many a wild star-gazer long ago⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That stealeth ever on the ear of him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, musing, gazeth on the distance dim.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sees the darkness coming as a cloud⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is not its form⁠—its voice⁠—most palpable and loud?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-23" id="noteref-23" epub:type="noteref">23</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">But what is this?⁠—it cometh⁠—and it brings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A music with it⁠—’tis the rush of wings⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A pause⁠—and then a sweeping, falling strain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Nesace is in her halls again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the wild energy of wanton haste</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her cheeks were flushing, and her lips apart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The zone that clung around her gentle waist</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had burst beneath the heaving of her heart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within the centre of that hall to breathe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She paus’d and panted, Zanthe! all beneath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fairy light that kiss’d her golden hair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And long’d to rest, yet could but sparkle there!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Young flowers were whispering in melody<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-24" id="noteref-24" epub:type="noteref">24</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To happy flowers that night⁠—and tree to tree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fountains were gushing music as they fell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In many a starlit grove, or moonlit dell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet silence came upon material things⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair flowers, bright waterfalls and angel wings⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sound alone that from the spirit sprang</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bore burden to the charm the maiden sang:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i4">“ ’Neath blue-bell or streamer⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Or tufted wild spray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">That keeps, from the dreamer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">The moonbeam away⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-25" id="noteref-25" epub:type="noteref">25</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Bright beings! that ponder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">With half closing eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">On the stars which your wonder</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Hath drawn from the skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Till they glance thro’ the shade, and</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Come down to your brow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Like⁠—eyes of the maiden</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Who calls on you now⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Arise! from your dreaming</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">In violet bowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">To duty beseeming</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">These star-litten hours⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">And shake from your tresses</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Encumber’d with dew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">The breath of those kisses</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">That cumber them too⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">(O! how, without you, Love!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Could angels be blest?)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Those kisses of true love</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">That lull’d ye to rest!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Up! shake from your wing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Each hindering thing:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">The dew of the night⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">It would weigh down your flight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">And true love caresses⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">O! leave them apart!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">They are light on the tresses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">But lead on the heart.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i4">“Ligeia! Ligeia!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">My beautiful one!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Whose harshest idea</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Will to melody run,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">O! is it thy will</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">On the breezes to toss?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Or, capriciously still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Like the lone Albatross,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-26" id="noteref-26" epub:type="noteref">26</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Incumbent on night</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">(As she on the air)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">To keep watch with delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">On the harmony there?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i4">“Ligeia! wherever</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Thy image may be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">No magic shall sever</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Thy music from thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Thou hast bound many eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">In a dreamy sleep⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">But the strains still arise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Which <em>thy</em> vigilance keep⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">The sound of the rain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Which leaps down to the flower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">And dances again</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">In the rhythm of the shower⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">The murmur that springs<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-27" id="noteref-27" epub:type="noteref">27</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">From the growing of grass</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Are the music of things⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">But are modell’d, alas!⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Away, then, my dearest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">O! hie thee away</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">To springs that lie clearest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Beneath the moon-ray⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">To lone lake that smiles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">In its dream of deep rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">At the many star-isles</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">That enjewel its breast⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Where wild flowers, creeping,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Have mingled their shade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">On its margin is sleeping</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Full many a maid⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Some have left the cool glade, and</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Have slept with the bee⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-28" id="noteref-28" epub:type="noteref">28</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Arouse them my maiden,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">On moorland and lea⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Go! breathe on their slumber,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">All softly in ear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">The musical number</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">They slumber’d to hear⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">For what can awaken</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">An angel so soon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Whose sleep hath been taken</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Beneath the cold moon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">As the spell which no slumber</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Of witchery may test,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">The rhythmical number</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Which lull’d him to rest?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Spirits in wing, and angels to the view,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thousand seraphs burst th’ Empyrean thro’.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Young dreams still hovering on their drowsy flight⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seraphs in all but “Knowledge,” the keen light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That fell, refracted, thro’ thy bounds, afar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Death! from eye of God upon that star:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet was that error⁠—sweeter still that death⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet was that error⁠—ev’n with <em>us</em> the breath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Science dims the mirror of our joy⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To them ’twere the Simoom, and would destroy⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For what (to them) availeth it to know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Truth is Falsehood⁠—or that Bliss is Woe?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet was their death⁠—with them to die was rife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the last ecstasy of satiate life⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond that death no immortality⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But sleep that pondereth and is not “to be”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there⁠—oh! may my weary spirit dwell⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Apart from Heaven’s Eternity⁠—and yet how far from Hell!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-29" id="noteref-29" epub:type="noteref">29</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>What guilty spirit, in what shrubbery dim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heard not the stirring summons of that hymn?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But two: they fell: for Heaven no grace imparts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To those who hear not for their beating hearts.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A maiden-angel and her seraph-lover⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O! where (and ye may seek the wide skies over)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was Love, the blind, near sober Duty known?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unguided Love hath fallen⁠—’mid “tears of perfect moan.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-30" id="noteref-30" epub:type="noteref">30</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He was a goodly spirit⁠—he who fell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wanderer by mossy-mantled well⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A gazer on the lights that shine above⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A dreamer in the moonbeam by his love:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What wonder? For each star is eye-like there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And looks so sweetly down on Beauty’s hair⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they, and ev’ry mossy spring were holy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To his love-haunted heart and melancholy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The night had found (to him a night of woe)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon a mountain crag, young Angelo⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beetling it bends athwart the solemn sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And scowls on starry worlds that down beneath it lie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here sate he with his love⁠—his dark eye bent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With eagle gaze along the firmament:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now turn’d it upon her⁠—but ever then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It trembled to the orb of <strong>Earth</strong> again.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Ianthe, dearest, see! how dim that ray!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How lovely ’tis to look so far away!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She seem’d not thus upon that autumn eve</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I left her gorgeous halls⁠—nor mourn’d to leave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That eve⁠—that eve⁠—I should remember well⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sun-ray dropp’d, in Lemnos, with a spell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On th’ Arabesque carving of a gilded hall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherein I sate, and on the draperied wall⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on my eye-lids⁠—O, the heavy light!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How drowsily it weigh’d them into night!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On flowers, before, and mist, and love they ran</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Persian Saadi in his Gulistan:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But O, that light!⁠—I slumber’d⁠—Death, the while,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stole o’er my senses in that lovely isle</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So softly that no single silken hair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Awoke that slept⁠—or knew that he was there.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“The last spot of Earth’s orb I trod upon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was a proud temple call’d the Parthenon;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-31" id="noteref-31" epub:type="noteref">31</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>More beauty clung around her columned wall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than even thy glowing bosom beats withal,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-32" id="noteref-32" epub:type="noteref">32</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when old Time my wing did disenthral</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thence sprang I⁠—as the eagle from his tower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And years I left behind me in an hour.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What time upon her airy bounds I hung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One half the garden of her globe was flung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unrolling as a chart unto my view⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tenantless cities of the desert too!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ianthe, beauty crowded on me then,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And half I wish’d to be again of men.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“My Angelo! and why of them to be?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A brighter dwelling-place is here for thee⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And greener fields than in yon world above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And women’s loveliness⁠—and passionate love.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But, list, Ianthe! when the air so soft</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Failed, as my pennoned spirit leapt aloft,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-33" id="noteref-33" epub:type="noteref">33</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps my brain grew dizzy⁠—but the world</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I left so late was into chaos hurled⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sprang from her station, on the winds apart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rolled a flame, the fiery Heaven athwart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Methought, my sweet one, then I ceased to soar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fell⁠—not swiftly as I rose before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But with a downward, tremulous motion thro’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Light, brazen rays, this golden star unto!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor long the measure of my falling hours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For nearest of all stars was thine to ours⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dread star! that came, amid a night of mirth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A red Dædalion on the timid Earth.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“We came⁠—and to thy Earth⁠—but not to us</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be given our lady’s bidding to discuss:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We came, my love; around, above, below,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gay fire-fly of the night we come and go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor ask a reason save the angel-nod</span>
					<br/>
					<span><em>She</em> grants to us, as granted by her God⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, Angelo, than thine grey Time unfurled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Never his fairy wing o’er fairer world!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dim was its little disk, and angel eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alone could see the phantom in the skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When first Al Aaraaf knew her course to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Headlong thitherward o’er the starry sea⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when its glory swell’d upon the sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As glowing Beauty’s bust beneath man’s eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We paused before the heritage of men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thy star trembled⁠—as doth Beauty then!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus, in discourse, the lovers whiled away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The night that waned and waned and brought no day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They fell: for Heaven to them no hope imparts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who hear not for the beating of their hearts.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</article>
		<article id="romance" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Romance</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Romance, who loves to nod and sing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With drowsy head and folded wing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the green leaves as they shake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far down within some shadowy lake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To me a painted paroquet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath been⁠—a most familiar bird⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Taught me my alphabet to say⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To lisp my very earliest word</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While in the wild wood I did lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A child⁠—with a most knowing eye.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Of late, eternal Condor years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So shake the very Heaven on high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With tumult as they thunder by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have no time for idle cares</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through gazing on the unquiet sky.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when an hour with calmer wings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its down upon my spirit flings⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That little time with lyre and rhyme</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To while away⁠—forbidden things!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My heart would feel to be a crime</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unless it trembled with the strings.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-1829-9" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To ⸻</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The bowers whereat, in dreams, I see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wantonest singing birds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are lips⁠—and all thy melody</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of lip-begotten words⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thine eyes, in Heaven of heart enshrined</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then desolately fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O God! on my funereal mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like starlight on a pall⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thy heart⁠—<em>thy</em> heart!⁠—I wake and sigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sleep to dream till day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of truth that gold can never buy⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the bawbles that it may.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-1829-12" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To ⸻</h2>
			<p>
				<span>I heed not that my earthly lot</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hath⁠—little of Earth in it⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That years of love have been forgot</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In the hatred of a minute:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I mourn not that the desolate</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are happier, sweet, than I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that <em>you</em> sorrow for <em>my</em> fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who am a passer-by.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-marie-louise" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To Marie Louise</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Not long ago, the writer of these lines,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the mad pride of intellectuality,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Maintained “the power of words”⁠—denied that ever</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A thought arose within the human brain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond the utterance of the human tongue:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now, as if in mockery of that boast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two words⁠—two foreign soft dissyllables⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Italian tones, made only to be murmured</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By angels dreaming in the moonlit “dew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That hangs like chains of pearl on Hermon hill,”⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have stirred from out the abysses of his heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unthought-like thoughts that are the souls of thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Richer, far wider, far diviner visions</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than even the seraph harper, Israfel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Who has “the sweetest voice of all God’s creatures”)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could hope to utter. And I! my spells are broken.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pen falls powerless from my shivering hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With thy dear name as text, though bidden by thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I can not write⁠—I can not speak or think⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alas, I can not feel; for ’tis not feeling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This standing motionless upon the golden</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Threshold of the wide-open gate of dreams,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gazing, entranced, adown the gorgeous vista,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thrilling as I see, upon the right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the left, and all the way along,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amid empurpled vapors, far away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To where the prospect terminates⁠—<em>thee only!</em></span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="fairyland" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Fairyland</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Dim vales⁠—and shadowy floods⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cloudy-looking woods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose forms we can’t discover</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the tears that drip all over</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Huge moons there wax and wane⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again⁠—again⁠—again⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Every moment of the night⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forever changing places⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they put out the star-light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the breath from their pale faces.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About twelve by the moon-dial</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One more filmy than the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(A kind which, upon trial,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They have found to be the best)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comes down⁠—still down⁠—and down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With its centre on the crown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a mountain’s eminence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While its wide circumference</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In easy drapery falls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over hamlets, over halls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherever they may be⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the strange woods⁠—o’er the sea⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over spirits on the wing⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over every drowsy thing⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And buries them up quite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a labyrinth of light⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then, how deep!⁠—O, deep!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is the passion of their sleep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the morning they arise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And their moony covering</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is soaring in the skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the tempests as they toss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like⁠—almost anything⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or a yellow Albatross.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They use that moon no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the same end as before⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Videlicet a tent⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which I think extravagant:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its atomies, however,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into a shower dissever,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of which those butterflies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Earth, who seek the skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so come down again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Never-contented things!)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have brought a specimen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon their quivering wings.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-city-in-the-sea" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The City in the Sea</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Lo! Death has reared himself a throne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a strange city lying alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far down within the dim West,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the good and the bad and the worst and the best</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have gone to their eternal rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There shrines and palaces and towers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Time-eaten towers that tremble not!)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Resemble nothing that is ours.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around, by lifting winds forgot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Resignedly beneath the sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The melancholy waters lie.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>No rays from the holy Heaven come down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the long night-time of that town;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But light from out the lurid sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Streams up the turrets silently⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gleams up the pinnacles far and free⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up domes⁠—up spires⁠—up kingly halls⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up fanes⁠—up Babylon-like walls⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up shadowy long-forgotten bowers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of sculptured ivy and stone flowers⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up many and many a marvellous shrine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose wreathèd friezes intertwine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The viol, the violet, and the vine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Resignedly beneath the sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The melancholy waters lie.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So blend the turrets and shadows there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That all seem pendulous in air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While from a proud tower in the town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Death looks gigantically down.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There open fanes and gaping graves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yawn level with the luminous waves;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But not the riches there that lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In each idol’s diamond eye⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not the gaily-jewelled dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tempt the waters from their bed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For no ripples curl, alas!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Along that wilderness of glass⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No swellings tell that winds may be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon some far-off happier sea⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No heavings hint that winds have been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On seas less hideously serene.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But lo, a stir is in the air!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wave⁠—there is a movement there!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if the towers had thrust aside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In slightly sinking, the dull tide⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if their tops had feebly given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A void within the filmy Heaven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The waves have now a redder glow⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hours are breathing faint and low⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when, amid no earthly moans,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down, down that town shall settle hence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hell, rising from a thousand thrones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall do it reverence.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="israfel" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Israfel<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-34" id="noteref-34" epub:type="noteref">34</a></h2>
			<p>
				<span>In Heaven a spirit doth dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Whose heart-strings are a lute”;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>None sing so wildly well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the angel Israfel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the giddy stars (so legends tell)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ceasing their hymns, attend the spell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of his voice, all mute.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Tottering above</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In her highest noon</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The enamoured Moon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blushes with love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While, to listen, the red levin</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(With the rapid Pleiads, even,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which were seven),</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pauses in Heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they say (the starry choir</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And the other listening things)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Israfeli’s fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is owing to that lyre</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By which he sits and sings⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The trembling living wire</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of those unusual strings.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But the skies that angel trod,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where deep thoughts are a duty⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where Love’s a grown up God⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where the Houri glances are</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Imbued with all the beauty</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which we worship in a star.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Therefore, thou art not wrong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Israfeli, who despisest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An unimpassioned song;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thee the laurels belong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Best bard, because the wisest!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Merrily live, and long!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The ecstasies above</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With thy burning measures suit⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy grief, thy joy, thy hate, thy love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With the fervor of thy lute⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Well may the stars be mute!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yes, Heaven is thine; but this</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is a world of sweets and sours;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Our flowers are merely⁠—flowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the shadow of thy perfect bliss</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is the sunshine of ours.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>If I could dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where Israfel</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hath dwelt, and he where I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He might not sing so wildly well</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A mortal melody,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While a bolder note than this might swell</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From my lyre within the sky.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-paean" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Pæan</h2>
			<section id="a-paean-1">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>
					<span>How shall the burial rite be read?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The solemn song be sung?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The requiem for the loveliest dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ever died so young?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-paean-2">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Her friends are gazing on her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on her gaudy bier,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And weep!⁠—oh! to dishonor</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dead beauty with a tear!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-paean-3">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>
					<span>They loved her for her wealth⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And they hated her for her pride⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But she grew in feeble health,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And they <em>love</em> her⁠—that she died.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-paean-4">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>They tell me (while they speak</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her “costly broider’d pall”)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That my voice is growing weak⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I should not sing at all⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-paean-5">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Or that my tone should be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tun’d to such solemn song</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So mournfully⁠—so mournfully,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the dead may feel no wrong.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-paean-6">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>But she is gone above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With young Hope at her side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I am drunk with love</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the dead, who is my bride.⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-paean-7">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Of the dead⁠—dead who lies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All perfum’d there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the death upon her eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the life upon her hair.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-paean-8">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Thus on the coffin loud and long</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I strike⁠—the murmur sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the grey chambers to my song,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall be the accompaniment.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-paean-9">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Thou diedst in thy life’s June⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But thou didst not die too fair:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou didst not die too soon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor with too calm an air.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-paean-10">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</h3>
				<p>
					<span>From more than friends on earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy life and love are riven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To join the untainted mirth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of more than thrones in heaven.⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="a-paean-11">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Therefore, to thee this night</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I will no requiem raise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But waft thee on thy flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With a Pæan of old days.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</article>
		<article id="the-sleeper" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Sleeper</h2>
			<p>
				<span>At midnight in the month of June,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I stand beneath the mystic moon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An opiate vapor, dewy, dim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Exhales from out her golden rim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, softly dripping, drop by drop,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the quiet mountain top.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Steals drowsily and musically</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the universal valley.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rosemary nods upon the grave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lily lolls upon the wave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrapping the fog about its breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ruin moulders into rest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looking like Lethe, see! the lake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A conscious slumber seems to take,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And would not, for the world, awake.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All Beauty sleeps!⁠—and lo! where lies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Her casement open to the skies)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Irene, with her Destinies!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Oh, lady bright! can it be right⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This window open to the night?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wanton airs, from the tree-top,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laughingly through the lattice drop⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bodiless airs, a wizard rout,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flit through thy chamber in and out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wave the curtain canopy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So fitfully⁠—so fearfully⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above the closed and fringèd lid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Neath which thy slumb’ring soul lies hid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That o’er the floor and down the wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like ghosts the shadows rise and fall!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh, lady dear, hast thou no fear?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why and what art thou dreaming here?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sure thou art come o’er far-off seas,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wonder to these garden trees!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strange is thy pallor! strange thy dress!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strange, above all, thy length of tress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And this all-solemn silentness!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The lady sleeps! Oh, may her sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which is enduring, so be deep!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heaven have her in its sacred keep!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This chamber changed for one more holy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This bed for one more melancholy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I pray to God that she may lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forever with unopened eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the dim sheeted ghosts go by!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>My love, she sleeps! Oh, may her sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As it is lasting, so be deep;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soft may the worms about her creep!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far in the forest, dim and old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For her may some tall vault unfold⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some vault that oft hath flung its black</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wingèd panels fluttering back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Triumphant, o’er the crested palls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of her grand family funerals⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some sepulchre, remote, alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against whose portal she hath thrown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In childhood, many an idle stone⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some tomb from out whose sounding door</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She ne’er shall force an echo more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrilling to think, poor child of sin!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was the dead who groaned within.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-helen" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To Helen<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-35" id="noteref-35" epub:type="noteref">35</a></h2>
			<p>
				<span>Helen, thy beauty is to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like those Nicean barks of yore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That gently, o’er a perfumed sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The weary, wayworn wanderer bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To his own native shore.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>On desperate seas long wont to roam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy hyacinth hair, thy classic face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy Naiad airs have brought me home</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the glory that was Greece,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the grandeur that was Rome.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Lo! in yon brilliant window niche</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How statue-like I me thee stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The agate lamp within thy hand!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah, Psyche, from the regions which</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are Holy Land!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-valley-of-unrest" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Valley of Unrest</h2>
			<p>
				<span><em>Once</em> it smiled a silent dell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the people did not dwell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They had gone unto the wars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trusting to the mild-eyed stars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nightly, from their azure towers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To keep watch above the flowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the midst of which all day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The red sun-light lazily lay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span><em>Now</em> each visitor shall confess</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sad valley’s restlessness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nothing there is motionless⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nothing save the airs that brood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the magic solitude.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah, by no wind are stirred those trees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That palpitate like the chill seas</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around the misty Hebrides!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah, by no wind those clouds are driven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That rustle through the unquiet Heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uneasily, from morn till even,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the violets there that lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In myriad types of the human eye⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the lilies there that wave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And weep above a nameless grave!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They wave:⁠—from out their fragrant tops</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eternal dews come down in drops.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They weep:⁠—from off their delicate stems</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perennial tears descend in gems.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-coliseum" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Coliseum</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Type of the antique Rome! Rich reliquary</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of lofty contemplation left to Time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By buried centuries of pomp and power!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At length⁠—at length⁠—after so many days</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of weary pilgrimage and burning thirst,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Thirst for the springs of lore that in thee lie,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I kneel, an altered and an humble man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amid thy shadows, and so drink within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My very soul thy grandeur, gloom, and glory!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Vastness! and Age! and Memories of Eld!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silence! and Desolation! and dim Night!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I feel ye now⁠—I feel ye in your strength⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O spells more sure than e’er Judæan king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Taught in the gardens of Gethsemane!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O charms more potent than the rapt Chaldee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ever drew down from out the quiet stars!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Here, where a hero fell, a column falls!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here, where the mimic eagle glared in gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A midnight vigil holds the swarthy bat!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here, where the dames of Rome their gilded hair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waved to the wind, now wave the reed and thistle!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here, where on golden throne the monarch lolled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glides, spectre-like, unto his marble home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lit by the wan light of the hornèd moon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The swift and silent lizard of the stones!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But stay! these walls⁠—these ivy-clad arcades⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These mouldering plinths⁠—these sad and blackened shafts⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These vague entablatures⁠—this crumbling frieze⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These shattered cornices⁠—this wreck⁠—this ruin⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These stones⁠—alas! these gray stones⁠—are they all⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All of the famed, and the colossal left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the corrosive Hours to Fate and me?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Not all”⁠—the Echoes answer me⁠—“not all!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prophetic sounds and loud, arise forever</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From us, and from all Ruin, unto the wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As melody from Memnon to the Sun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We rule the hearts of mightiest men⁠—we rule</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a despotic sway all giant minds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We are not impotent⁠—we pallid stones.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not all our power is gone⁠—not all our fame⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not all the magic of our high renown⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not all the wonder that encircles us⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not all the mysteries that in us lie⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not all the memories that hang upon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cling around about us as a garment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clothing us in a robe of more than glory.”</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="serenade" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Serenade</h2>
			<p>
				<span>So sweet the hour⁠—so calm the time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I feel it more than half a crime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Nature sleeps and stars are mute,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To mar the silence ev’n with lute.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At rest on ocean’s brilliant dyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An image of Elysium lies:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seven Pleiades entranced in Heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Form in the deep another seven:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Endymion nodding from above</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sees in the sea a second love.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the valleys dim and brown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on the spectral mountain’s crown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wearied light is dying down;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And earth, and stars, and sea, and sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are redolent of sleep, as I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Am redolent of thee and thine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enthralling love, my Adeline.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But list, O list⁠—so soft and low</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy lover’s voice tonight shall flow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, scarce awake, thy soul shall deem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My words the music of a dream.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus, while no single sound too rude,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon thy slumber shall intrude,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our thoughts, our souls⁠—O God above!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In every deed shall mingle, love.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-one-in-paradise" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To One in Paradise</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Thou wast all that to me, love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For which my soul did pine⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A green isle in the sea, love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A fountain and a shrine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All wreathed with fairy fruits and flowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all the flowers were mine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ah, dream too bright to last!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ah, starry Hope! that didst arise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But to be overcast!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A voice from out the Future cries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“On! on!”⁠—but o’er the Past</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Dim gulf!) my spirit hovering lies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mute, motionless, aghast!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For, alas! alas! with me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The light of Life is o’er!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“No more⁠—no more⁠—no more”⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Such language holds the solemn sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To the sands upon the shore)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall bloom the thunder-blasted tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or the stricken eagle soar!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And all my days are trances,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all my nightly dreams</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are where thy dark eye glances,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And where thy footstep gleams⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In what ethereal dances,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By what eternal streams!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Alas! For that accursèd time</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They bore thee o’er the billow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From love to titled age and crime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And an unholy pillow!⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From me, and from our misty clime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where weeps the silver willow!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="hymn" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Hymn</h2>
			<p>
				<span>At morn⁠—at noon⁠—at twilight dim⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Maria! thou hast heard my hymn!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In joy and woe⁠—in good and ill⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mother of God, be with me still!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the Hours flew brightly by</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And not a cloud obscured the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My soul, lest it should truant be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy grace did guide to thine and thee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now, when storms of Fate o’ercast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Darkly my Present and my Past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let my Future radiant shine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With sweet hopes of thee and thine!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-bridal-ballad" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Bridal Ballad</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The ring is on my hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And the wreath is on my brow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Satins and jewels grand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are all at my command,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And I am happy now.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And my lord he loves me well;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">But, when first he breathed his vow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I felt my bosom swell⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the words rang as a knell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the voice seemed <em>his</em> who fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the battle down the dell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And who is happy now.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But he spoke to reassure me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And he kissed my pallid brow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While a reverie came o’er me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to the churchyard bore me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I sighed to him before me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thinking him dead D’Elormie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">“Oh, I am happy now!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus the words were spoken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And thus the plighted vow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, though my faith be broken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, though my heart be broken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behold the golden token</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">That <em>proves</em> me happy now!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Would to God I could awaken!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">For I dream I know not how,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And my soul is sorely shaken</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest an evil step be taken⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest the dead who is forsaken</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">May not be happy now.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-zante" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To Zante</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Fair isle, that from the fairest of all flowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy gentlest of all gentle names dost take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How many memories of what radiant hours</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">At sight of thee and thine at once awake!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How many scenes of what departed bliss!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">How many thoughts of what entombèd hopes!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How many visions of a maiden that is</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No more⁠—no more upon thy verdant slopes!</span>
				<br/>
				<span><em>No more!</em> alas, that magical sad sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Transforming all! Thy charms shall please <em>no more</em>⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy memory <em>no more</em>! Accursèd ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Henceforth I hold thy flower-enamelled shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O hyacinthine isle! O purple Zante!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“<i xml:lang="it">Isola d’oro! Fior di Levante!</i>”</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-haunted-palace" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Haunted Palace</h2>
			<p>
				<span>In the greenest of our valleys</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By good angels tenanted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once a fair and stately palace⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Radiant palace⁠—reared its head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the monarch Thought’s dominion⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It stood there!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never seraph spread a pinion</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Over fabric half so fair.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Banners yellow, glorious, golden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">On its roof did float and flow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(This⁠—all this⁠—was in the olden</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Time long ago),</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And every gentle air that dallied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that sweet day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Along the ramparts plumed and pallid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A wingèd odor went away.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wanderers in that happy valley,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through two luminous windows, saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spirits moving musically,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To a lute’s well-tunèd law,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round about a throne where, sitting</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">(Porphyrogene!)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In state his glory well befitting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The ruler of the realm was seen.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And all with pearl and ruby glowing</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was the fair palace door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through which came flowing, flowing, flowing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sparkling evermore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A troop of Echoes, whose sweet duty</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Was but to sing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In voices of surpassing beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The wit and wisdom of their king.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But evil things, in robes of sorrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Assailed the monarch’s high estate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Ah, let us mourn!⁠—for never morrow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shall dawn upon him desolate!)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And round about his home the glory</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That blushed and bloomed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is but a dim-remembered story</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the old time entombed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And travellers, now, within that valley,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through the red-litten windows see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vast forms, that move fantastically</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To a discordant melody,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While, like a ghastly rapid river,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Through the pale door</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hideous throng rush out forever</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And laugh⁠—but smile no more.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="silence" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Silence</h2>
			<p>
				<span>There are some qualities⁠—some incorporate things,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That have a double life, which thus is made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A type of that twin entity which springs</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From matter and light, evinced in solid and shade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is a two-fold <em>Silence</em>⁠—sea and shore⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Body and soul. One dwells in lonely places,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Newly with grass o’ergrown; some solemn graces,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some human memories and tearful lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Render him terrorless: his name’s “No More.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He is the corporate Silence: dread him not!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No power hath he of evil in himself;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But should some urgent fate (untimely lot!)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bring thee to meet his shadow (nameless elf,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That haunteth the lone regions where hath trod</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No foot of man), commend thyself to God!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-conqueror-worm" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Conqueror Worm</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Lo! ’tis a gala night</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Within the lonesome latter years!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An angel throng, bewinged, bedight</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In veils, and drowned in tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sit in a theatre, to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">A play of hopes and fears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the orchestra breathes fitfully</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The music of the spheres.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Mimes, in the form of God on high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Mutter and mumble low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hither and thither fly⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Mere puppets they, who come and go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At bidding of vast formless things</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">That shift the scenery to and fro,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flapping from out their Condor wings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Invisible Woe!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That motley drama⁠—oh, be sure</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">It shall not be forgot!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With its Phantom chased forevermore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">By a crowd that seize it not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through a circle that ever returneth in</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">To the self-same spot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And much of Madness, and more of Sin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And Horror the soul of the plot.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But see, amid the mimic rout</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">A crawling shape intrude!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A blood-red thing that writhes from out</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The scenic solitude!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It writhes!⁠—it writhes!⁠—with mortal pangs</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The mimes become its food,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the angels sob at vermin fangs</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In human gore imbued.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Out⁠—out are the lights⁠—out all!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And, over each quivering form,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The curtain, a funeral pall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Comes down with the rush of a storm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the angels, all pallid and wan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Uprising, unveiling, affirm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the play is the tragedy, “Man,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And its Hero the Conqueror Worm.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="eulalie" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Eulalie</h2>
			<p>
				<span class="i4">I dwelt alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">In a world of moan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And my soul was a stagnant tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the fair and gentle Eulalie became my blushing bride⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the yellow-haired young Eulalie became my smiling bride.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Ah, less⁠—less bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">The stars of the night</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Than the eyes of the radiant girl!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">And never a flake</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">That the vapour can make</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">With the moon-tints of purple and pearl,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can vie with the modest Eulalie’s most unregarded curl⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can compare with the bright-eyed Eulalie’s most humble and careless curl.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Now Doubt⁠—now Pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Come never again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">For her soul gives me sigh for sigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">And all day long</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Shines, bright and strong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Astarté within the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While ever to her dear Eulalie upturns her matron eye⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While ever to her young Eulalie upturns her violet eye.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="lenore" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Lenore</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Ah, broken is the golden bowl! the spirit flown forever!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let the bell toll!⁠—a saintly soul floats on the Stygian river.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, Guy de Vere, hast <em>thou</em> no tear?⁠—weep now or never more!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See! on yon drear and rigid bier low lies thy love, Lenore!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come! let the burial rite be read⁠—the funeral song be sung!⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An anthem for the queenliest dead that ever died so young⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A dirge for her the doubly dead in that she died so young.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Wretches! ye loved her for her wealth and hated her for her pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when she fell in feeble health, ye blessed her⁠—that she died!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How <em>shall</em> the ritual, then, be read?⁠—the requiem how be sung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By you⁠—by yours, the evil eye⁠—by yours, the slanderous tongue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That did to death the innocent that died, and died so young?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><i xml:lang="la">Peccavimus</i>; but rave not thus! and let a Sabbath song</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go up to God so solemnly the dead may feel no wrong!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sweet Lenore hath “gone before,” with Hope, that flew beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaving thee wild for the dear child that should have been thy bride⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For her, the fair and <i xml:lang="fr">débonnaire</i>, that now so lowly lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The life upon her yellow hair but not within her eyes⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The life still there, upon her hair⁠—the death upon her eyes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Avaunt! to-night my heart is light. No dirge will I upraise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But waft the angel on her flight with a pæan of old days!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let <em>no</em> bell toll!⁠—lest her sweet soul, amid its hallowed mirth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should catch the note, as it doth float up from the damnèd Earth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To friends above, from fiends below, the indignant ghost is riven⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Hell unto a high estate far up within the Heaven⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“From grief and groan to a golden throne beside the King of Heaven.”</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="dreamland" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Dreamland</h2>
			<p>
				<span>By a route obscure and lonely,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Haunted by ill angels only,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where an Eidolon, named <b>Night</b>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On a black throne reigns upright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have reached these lands but newly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From an ultimate dim Thule⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From a wild weird clime that lieth, sublime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Out of <b>Space</b>⁠—out of <b>Time</b>.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Bottomless vales and boundless floods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And chasms, and caves, and Titan woods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With forms that no man can discover</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the dews that drip all over;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mountains toppling evermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into seas without a shore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seas that restlessly aspire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Surging, unto skies of fire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lakes that endlessly outspread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their lone waters⁠—lone and dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their still waters⁠—still and chilly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the snows of the lolling lily.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>By the lakes that thus outspread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their lone waters, lone and dead⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their sad waters, sad and chilly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the snows of the lolling lily⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the mountains⁠—near the river</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Murmuring lowly, murmuring ever⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the grey woods⁠—by the swamp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the toad and the newt encamp⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the dismal tarns and pools</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where dwell the Ghouls⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By each spot the most unholy⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In each nook most melancholy⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There the traveller meets aghast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sheeted Memories of the Past⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shrouded forms that start and sigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As they pass the wanderer by⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>White-robed forms of friends long given,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In agony, to the Earth⁠—and Heaven.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For the heart whose woes are legion</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis a peaceful, soothing region⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the spirit that walks in shadow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis⁠—oh ’tis an Eldorado!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the traveller, travelling through it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May not⁠—dare not openly view it;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never its mysteries are exposed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the weak human eye unclosed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So wills its King, who hath forbid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The uplifting of the fringèd lid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus the sad Soul that here passes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beholds it but through darkened glasses.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>By a route obscure and lonely,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Haunted by ill angels only,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where an Eidolon, named <b>Night</b>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On a black throne reigns upright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have wandered home but newly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From this ultimate dim Thule.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-raven" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Raven<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-36" id="noteref-36" epub:type="noteref">36</a></h2>
			<p>
				<span>Once upon a midnight dreary, while I pondered, weak and weary,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over many a quaint and curious volume of forgotten lore⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While I nodded, nearly napping, suddenly there came a tapping,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As of some one gently rapping⁠—rapping at my chamber door.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“ ’Tis some visitor,” I muttered, “tapping at my chamber door⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Only this, and nothing more.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ah, distinctly I remember it was in the bleak December,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And each separate dying ember wrought its ghost upon the floor.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eagerly I wished the morrow;⁠—vainly I had sought to borrow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From my books surcease of sorrow⁠—sorrow for the lost Lenore⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the rare and radiant maiden whom the angels name Lenore⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Nameless here for evermore.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And the silken sad uncertain rustling of each purple curtain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrilled me⁠—filled me with fantastic terrors never felt before;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So that now, to still the beating of my heart, I stood repeating</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“ ’Tis some visitor entreating entrance at my chamber door⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some late visitor entreating entrance at my chamber door;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">This it is, and nothing more.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Presently my soul grew stronger; hesitating then no longer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Sir,” said I, “or Madam, truly your forgiveness I implore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the fact is I was napping, and so gently you came rapping,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so faintly you came tapping⁠—tapping at my chamber door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I scarce was sure I heard you”⁠—here I opened wide the door:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Darkness there and nothing more.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Deep into that darkness peering, long I stood there wondering, fearing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doubting, dreaming dreams no mortal ever dared to dream before;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the silence was unbroken, and the darkness gave no token,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the only word there spoken was the whispered word, “Lenore!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This I whispered, and an echo murmured back the word, “Lenore!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Merely this and nothing more.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Back into the chamber turning, all my soul within me burning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon I heard again a tapping, somewhat louder than before.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Surely,” said I, “surely that is something at my window lattice;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let me see, then, what thereat is, and this mystery explore⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let my heart be still a moment and this mystery explore;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">’Tis the wind and nothing more.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Open here I flung the shutter, when, with many a flirt and flutter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In there stepped a stately Raven of the saintly days of yore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not the least obeisance made he; not an instant stopped or stayed he;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, with mien of lord or lady, perched above my chamber door⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perched upon a bust of Pallas just above my chamber door⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Perched, and sat, and nothing more.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then this ebony bird beguiling my sad fancy into smiling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the grave and stern decorum of the countenance it wore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Though thy crest be shorn and shaven, thou,” I said, “art sure no craven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ghastly grim and ancient Raven wandering from the Nightly shore⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell me what thy lordly name is on the Night’s Plutonian shore!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Quoth the Raven, “Nevermore.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Much I marvelled this ungainly fowl to hear discourse so plainly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though its answer little meaning⁠—little relevancy bore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For we cannot help agreeing that no living human being</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ever yet was blessed with seeing bird above his chamber door⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bird or beast upon the sculptured bust above his chamber door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">With such name as “Nevermore.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But the raven, sitting lonely on the placid bust, spoke only</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That one word, as if his soul in that one word he did outpour.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nothing farther then he uttered⁠—not a feather then he fluttered⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till I scarcely more than muttered, “Other friends have flown before⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the morrow <em>he</em> will leave me, as my hopes have flown before.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Then the bird said, “Nevermore.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Startled at the stillness broken by reply so aptly spoken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Doubtless,” said I, “what it utters is its only stock and store,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Caught from some unhappy master whom unmerciful Disaster</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Followed fast and followed faster till his songs one burden bore⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the dirges of his Hope that melancholy burden bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Of⁠—‘Never⁠—nevermore.’ ”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But the raven still beguiling all my sad soul into smiling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straight I wheeled a cushioned seat in front of bird and bust and door;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, upon the velvet sinking, I betook myself to linking</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fancy unto fancy, thinking what this ominous bird of yore⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What this grim, ungainly, ghastly, gaunt, and ominous bird of yore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Meant in croaking “Nevermore.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This I sat engaged in guessing, but no syllable expressing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the fowl whose fiery eyes now burned into my bosom’s core;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This and more I sat divining, with my head at ease reclining</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the cushion’s velvet lining that the lamplight gloated o’er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But whose velvet violet lining with the lamplight gloating o’er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3"><em>She</em> shall press, ah, nevermore!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then, methought, the air grew denser, perfumed from an unseen censer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swung by Seraphim whose footfalls tinkled on the tufted floor.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Wretch,” I cried, “thy God hath lent thee⁠—by these angels he hath sent thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Respite⁠—respite and nepenthe from thy memories of Lenore!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quaff, oh quaff this kind nepenthe and forget this lost Lenore!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Quoth the raven, “Nevermore.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Prophet!” said I, “thing of evil!⁠—prophet still, if bird or devil!⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether Tempter sent, or whether tempest tossed thee here ashore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Desolate yet all undaunted, on this desert land enchanted⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On this home by Horror haunted⁠—tell me truly, I implore⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is there⁠—<em>is</em> there balm in Gilead?⁠—tell me⁠—tell me, I implore!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Quoth the raven, “Nevermore.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Prophet!” said I, “thing of evil!⁠—prophet still, if bird or devil!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By that Heaven that bends above us⁠—by that God we both adore⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell this soul with sorrow laden if, within the distant Aidenn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It shall clasp a sainted maiden whom the angels name Lenore⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clasp a rare and radiant maiden whom the angels name Lenore.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Quoth the raven, “Nevermore.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Be that word our sign of parting, bird or fiend!” I shrieked, upstarting⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Get thee back into the tempest and the Night’s Plutonian shore!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave no black plume as a token of that lie thy soul hath spoken!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave my loneliness unbroken!⁠—quit the bust above my door!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take thy beak from out my heart, and take thy form from off my door!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Quoth the raven, “Nevermore.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And the raven, never flitting, still is sitting, still is sitting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the pallid bust of Pallas just above my chamber door;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his eyes have all the seeming of a demon’s that is dreaming,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the lamplight o’er him streaming throws his shadow on the floor;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And my soul from out that shadow that lies floating on the floor</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Shall be lifted⁠—nevermore!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-f" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To F⁠⸺⁠<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-37" id="noteref-37" epub:type="noteref">37</a></h2>
			<p>
				<span>Beloved! amid the earnest woes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">That crowd around my earthly path⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Drear path, alas! where grows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not even one lonely rose)⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">My soul at least a solace hath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In dreams of thee, and therein knows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An Eden of bland repose.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus thy memory is to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Like some enchanted far-off isle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In some tumultuous sea⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some ocean throbbing far and free</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">With storms⁠—but where meanwhile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Serenest skies continually</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Just o’er that one bright island smile.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-valentine" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Valentine<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-38" id="noteref-38" epub:type="noteref">38</a></h2>
			<p>
				<span>For her this rhyme is penned, whose luminous eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Brightly expressive as the twins of Leda,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall find her own sweet name, that, nestling lies</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Upon the page, enwrapped from every reader.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Search narrowly the lines!⁠—they hold a treasure</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Divine⁠—a talisman⁠—an amulet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That must be worn <em>at heart</em>. Search well the measure⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The words⁠—the syllables! Do not forget</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The trivialest point, or you may lose your labor!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And yet there is in this no Gordian knot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which one might not undo without a sabre,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If one could merely comprehend the plot.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enwritten upon the leaf where now are peering</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Eyes scintillating soul, there lie <i xml:lang="la">perdus</i></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three eloquent words oft uttered in the hearing</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of poets by poets⁠—as the name is a poet’s, too.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its letters, although naturally lying</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like the knight Pinto⁠—Mendez Ferdinando⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still form a synonym for Truth⁠—Cease trying!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You will not read the riddle, though you do the best you <em>can</em> do.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-marie-louise-shew" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To Marie Louise (Shew)</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Of all who hail thy presence as the morning⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all to whom thine absence is the night⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blotting utterly from out high heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sacred sun⁠—of all who, weeping, bless thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hourly for hope⁠—for life⁠—ah! above all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the resurrection of deep-buried faith</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In truth⁠—in virtue⁠—in humanity⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all who, on despair’s unhallowed bed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lying down to die, have suddenly arisen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At thy soft-murmured words, “Let there be light!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the soft-murmured words that were fulfilled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the seraphic glancing of thine eyes⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all who owe thee most, whose gratitude</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nearest resembles worship⁠—oh, remember</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The truest⁠—the most fervently devoted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And think that these weak lines are written by him⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By him who, as he pens them, thrills to think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His spirit is communing with an angel’s.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="ulalume" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Ulalume<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-39" id="noteref-39" epub:type="noteref">39</a></h2>
			<p>
				<span>The skies they were ashen and sober;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The leaves they were crispèd and sere⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The leaves they were withering and sere;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was night in the lonesome October</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of my most immemorial year:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was hard by the dim lake of Auber,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In the misty mid region of Weir:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was down by the dank tarn of Auber,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In the ghoul-haunted woodland of Weir.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Here once, through an alley Titanic,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of cypress, I roamed with my Soul⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of cypress, with Psyche, my Soul.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These were days when my heart was volcanic</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">As the scoriac rivers that roll⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">As the lavas that restlessly roll</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their sulphurous currents down Yaanek,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In the ultimate climes of the pole⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That groan as they roll down Mount Yaanek</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In the realms of the boreal pole.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Our talk had been serious and sober,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">But our thoughts they were palsied and sere⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Our memories were treacherous and sere⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For we knew not the month was October,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And we marked not the night of the year⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">(Ah, night of all nights in the year!)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We noted not the dim lake of Auber⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">(Though once we had journeyed down here)⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We remembered not the dank tarn of Auber,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Nor the ghoul-haunted woodland of Weir.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And now, as the night was senescent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And star-dials pointed to morn⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">As the sun-dials hinted of morn⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the end of our path a liquescent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And nebulous lustre was born,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of which a miraculous crescent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Arose with a duplicate horn⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Astarte’s bediamonded crescent</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Distinct with its duplicate horn.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And I said⁠—“She is warmer than Dian:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">She rolls through an ether of sighs⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">She revels in a region of sighs:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She has seen that the tears are not dry on</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">These cheeks, where the worm never dies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And has come past the stars of the Lion</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">To point us the path to the skies⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">To the Lethean peace of the skies⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come up, in despite of the Lion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">To shine on us with her bright eyes⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come up through the lair of the Lion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">With love in her luminous eyes.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But Psyche, uplifting her finger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Said⁠—“Sadly this star I mistrust⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Her pallor I strangely mistrust⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh, hasten!⁠—oh, let us not linger!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Oh, fly!⁠—let us fly!⁠—for we must.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In terror she spoke; letting sink her</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Wings till they trailed in the dust⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In agony sobbed, letting sink her</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Plumes till they trailed in the dust⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Till they sorrowfully trailed in the dust.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I replied⁠—“This is nothing but dreaming.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Let us on by this tremulous light!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Let us bathe in this crystalline light!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its Sybillic splendor is beaming</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">With Hope and in Beauty to-night⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">See!⁠—it flickers up the sky through the night!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah, we safely may trust to its gleaming,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And be sure it will lead us aright⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We safely may trust to a gleaming</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">That cannot but guide us aright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Since it flickers up to Heaven through the night.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus I pacified Psyche and kissed her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And tempted her out of her gloom⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And conquered her scruples and gloom;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we passed to the end of the vista,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">But were stopped by the door of a tomb⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">By the door of a legended tomb;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I said⁠—“What is written, sweet sister,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">On the door of this legended tomb?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">She replied⁠—“Ulalume⁠—Ulalume⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">’Tis the vault of thy lost Ulalume!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then my heart it grew ashen and sober</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">As the leaves that were crispèd and sere⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">As the leaves that were withering and sere;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I cried⁠—“It was surely October</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">On <em>this</em> very night of last year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">That I journeyed⁠—I journeyed down here⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">That I brought a dread burden down here!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">On this night, of all nights in the year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Ah, what demon has tempted me here?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well I know, now, this dim lake of Auber⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">This misty mid region of Weir⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well I know, now, this dank tarn of Auber⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">This ghoul-haunted woodland of Weir.”</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-bells" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Bells<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-40" id="noteref-40" epub:type="noteref">40</a></h2>
			<section id="the-bells-1">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i3">Hear the sledges with the bells⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i7">Silver bells!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What a world of merriment their melody foretells!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">How they tinkle, tinkle, tinkle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">In the icy air of night!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">While the stars, that oversprinkle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">All the heavens, seem to twinkle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">With a crystalline delight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i5">Keeping time, time, time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i5">In a sort of Runic rhyme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the tintinnabulation that so musically wells</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">From the bells, bells, bells, bells,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i7">Bells, bells, bells⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the jingling and the tinkling of the bells.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-bells-2">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i5">Hear the mellow wedding bells</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i7">Golden bells!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What a world of happiness their harmony foretells!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Through the balmy air of night</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">How they ring out their delight!⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">From the molten golden-notes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i7">And all in tune,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">What a liquid ditty floats</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">To the turtle-dove that listens, while she gloats</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i7">On the moon!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Oh, from out the sounding cells,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What a gush of euphony voluminously wells!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i7">How it swells!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i7">How it dwells</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">On the future! how it tells</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Of the rapture that impels</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">To the swinging and the ringing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Of the bells, bells, bells,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Of the bells, bells, bells, bells,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i7">Bells, bells, bells⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To the rhyming and the chiming of the bells!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-bells-3">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i5">Hear the loud alarum bells⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i7">Brazen bells!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What a tale of terror now their turbulency tells!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">In the startled ear of night</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">How they scream out their affright!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i5">Too much horrified to speak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i5">They can only shriek, shriek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Out of tune,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a clamorous appealing to the mercy of the fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a mad expostulation with the deaf and frantic fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Leaping higher, higher, higher,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">With a desperate desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i5">And a resolute endeavor</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i5">Now⁠—now to sit or never,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">By the side of the pale-faced moon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Oh, the bells, bells, bells!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">What a tale their terror tells</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i7">Of Despair!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">How they clang, and clash, and roar!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">What a horror they outpour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the bosom of the palpitating air!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Yet the ear it fully knows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i5">By the twanging,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i5">And the clanging,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">How the danger ebbs and flows;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Yet the ear distinctly tells,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">In the jangling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">And the wrangling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">How the danger sinks and swells,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the sinking or the swelling in the anger of the bells⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Of the bells⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Of the bells, bells, bells, bells,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i7">Bells, bells, bells⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the clamour and the clangour of the bells!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-bells-4">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i4">Hear the tolling of the bells⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i7">Iron bells!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What a world of solemn thought their monody compels!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">In the silence of the night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">How we shiver with affright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At the melancholy meaning of their tone!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">For every sound that floats</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">From the rust within their throats</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Is a groan.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">And the people⁠—ah, the people⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">They that dwell up in the steeple,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">All alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">And who, tolling, tolling, tolling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">In that muffled monotone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Feel a glory in so rolling</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">On the human heart a stone⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">They are neither man nor woman⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">They are neither brute nor human⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">They are Ghouls:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">And their king it is who tolls;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">And he rolls, rolls, rolls, rolls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i7">Rolls</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">A pæan from the bells!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">And his merry bosom swells</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">With the pæan of the bells!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">And he dances, and he yells;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Keeping time, time, time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">In a sort of Runic rhyme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">To the pæan of the bells⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i7">Of the bells:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Keeping time, time, time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">In a sort of Runic rhyme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">To the throbbing of the bells⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Of the bells, bells, bells⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">To the sobbing of the bells;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Keeping time, time, time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">As he knells, knells, knells,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">In a happy Runic rhyme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">To the rolling of the bells⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">Of the bells, bells, bells⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">To the tolling of the bells,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Of the bells, bells, bells, bells,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i7">Bells, bells, bells⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To the moaning and the groaning of the bells.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</article>
		<article id="eldorado" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Eldorado<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-41" id="noteref-41" epub:type="noteref">41</a></h2>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">Gaily bedight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">A gallant knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In sunshine and in shadow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Had journeyed long,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Singing a song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In search of Eldorado.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">But he grew old⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">This knight so bold⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And o’er his heart a shadow</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Fell, as he found</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">No spot of ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That looked like Eldorado.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">And, as his strength</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Failed him at length,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He met a pilgrim shadow⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">“Shadow,” said he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">“Where can it be⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This land of Eldorado?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">“Over the Mountains</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of the Moon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down the Valley of the Shadow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Ride, boldly ride,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The shade replied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“If you seek for Eldorado!”</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="an-enigma" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">An Enigma<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-42" id="noteref-42" epub:type="noteref">42</a></h2>
			<p>
				<span>“Seldom we find,” says Solomon Don Dunce,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">“Half an idea in the profoundest sonnet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through all the flimsy things we see at once</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">As easily as through a Naples bonnet⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Trash of all trash!⁠—how <em>can</em> a lady don it?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet heavier far than your Petrarchan stuff⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Owl-downy nonsense that the faintest puff</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Twirls into trunk-paper the while you con it.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, veritably, Sol is right enough.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The general tuckermanities are arrant</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bubbles⁠—ephemeral and <em>so</em> transparent⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">But <em>this</em> is, now⁠—you may depend upon it⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stable, opaque, immortal⁠—all by dint</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the dear names that lie concealed within ’t.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-helen-1848" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To Helen<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-43" id="noteref-43" epub:type="noteref">43</a></h2>
			<p>
				<span>I saw thee once⁠—once only⁠—years ago:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I must not say <em>how</em> many⁠—but <em>not</em> many.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was a July midnight; and from out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A full-orbed moon, that, like thine own soul, soaring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sought a precipitate pathway up through heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There fell a silvery-silken veil of light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With quietude, and sultriness, and slumber,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the upturn’d faces of a thousand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roses that grew in an enchanted garden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where no wind dared to stir, unless on tiptoe⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell on the upturn’d faces of these roses</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That gave out, in return for the love-light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their odorous souls in an ecstatic death⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell on the upturn’d faces of these roses</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That smiled and died in this parterre, enchanted</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By thee, and by the poetry of thy presence.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clad all in white, upon a violet bank</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I saw thee half-reclining; while the moon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell on the upturn’d faces of the roses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on thine own, upturn’d⁠—alas, in sorrow!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Was it not Fate, that, on this July midnight⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was it not Fate (whose name is also Sorrow),</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That bade me pause before that garden-gate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To breathe the incense of those slumbering roses?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No footstep stirred: the hated world all slept,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save only thee and me⁠—(O Heaven!⁠—O God!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How my heart beats in coupling those two words!)⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save only thee and me. I paused⁠—I looked⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in an instant all things disappeared.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Ah, bear in mind this garden was enchanted!)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pearly lustre of the moon went out:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mossy banks and the meandering paths,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The happy flowers and the repining trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were seen no more: the very roses’ odors</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Died in the arms of the adoring airs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All⁠—all expired save thee⁠—save less than thou:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save only the divine light in thine eyes⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save but the soul in thine uplifted eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I saw but them⁠—they were the world to me!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I saw but them⁠—saw only them for hours⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw only them until the moon went down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What wild heart-histories seemed to lie enwritten</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon those crystalline, celestial spheres!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How dark a woe! yet how sublime a hope!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How silently serene a sea of pride!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How daring an ambition! yet how deep⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How fathomless a capacity for love!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But now, at length, dear Dian sank from sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into a western couch of thunder-cloud;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou, a ghost, amid the entombing trees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Didst glide away. <em>Only thine eyes remained.</em></span>
				<br/>
				<span>They <em>would not</em> go⁠—they never yet have gone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lighting my lonely pathway home that night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span><em>They</em> have not left me (as my hopes have) since;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They follow me⁠—they lead me through the years.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They are my ministers⁠—yet I their slave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their office is to illumine and enkindle⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My duty, <em>to be saved</em> by their bright light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And purified in their electric fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sanctified in their elysian fire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They fill my soul with Beauty (which is Hope),</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And are far up in Heaven⁠—the stars I kneel to</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the sad, silent watches of my night;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While even in the meridian glare of day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I see them still⁠—two sweetly scintillant</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Venuses, unextinguished by the sun!</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="annabel-lee" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Annabel Lee<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-44" id="noteref-44" epub:type="noteref">44</a></h2>
			<p>
				<span>It was many and many a year ago,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In a kingdom by the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That a maiden lived whom you may know</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">By the name of <b>Annabel Lee</b>;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And this maiden she lived with no other thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Than to love and be loved by me.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span><em>I</em> was a child and <em>she</em> was a child,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In this kingdom by the sea:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But we loved with a love that was more than love⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">I and my <b>Annabel Lee</b>;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a love that the winged seraphs of heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Coveted her and me.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And this was the reason that, long ago,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In this kingdom by the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wind blew out of a cloud, chilling</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">My beautiful <b>Annabel Lee</b>;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So that her highborn kinsmen came</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And bore her away from me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To shut her up in a sepulchre</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In this kingdom by the sea.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The angels, not half so happy in heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Went envying her and me⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yes!⁠—that was the reason (as all men know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In this kingdom by the sea)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the wind came out of the cloud by night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Chilling and killing my <b>Annabel Lee</b>.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But our love it was stronger by far than the love</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of those who were older than we⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of many far wiser than we⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And neither the angels in heaven above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Nor the demons down under the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can ever dissever my soul from the soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of the beautiful <b>Annabel Lee</b>.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For the moon never beams without bringing me dreams</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of the beautiful <b>Annabel Lee</b>;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the stars never rise but I see the bright eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of the beautiful <b>Annabel Lee</b>;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so, all the night-tide, I lie down by the side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of my darling, my darling, my life and my bride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In her sepulchre there by the sea⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In her tomb by the side of the sea.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-dream-within-a-dream" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Dream Within a Dream</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Take this kiss upon the brow!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, in parting from you now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus much let me avow⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You are not wrong, who deem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That my days have been a dream:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet if hope has flown away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a night, or in a day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a vision, or in none,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is it therefore the less <em>gone</em>?</span>
				<br/>
				<span><em>All</em> that we see or seem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is but a dream within a dream.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I stand amid the roar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a surf-tormented shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I hold within my hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grains of the golden sand⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How few! yet how they creep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through my fingers to the deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While I weep⁠—while I weep!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O God! can I not grasp</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Them with a tighter clasp?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O God! can I not save</span>
				<br/>
				<span><em>One</em> from the pitiless wave?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is <em>all</em> that we see or seem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But a dream within a dream?</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="for-annie" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">For Annie<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-45" id="noteref-45" epub:type="noteref">45</a></h2>
			<p>
				<span>Thank Heaven! the crisis⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The danger is past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the lingering illness</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Is over at last⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the fever called “Living”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Is conquered at last.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Sadly, I know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">I am shorn of my strength,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And no muscle I move</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">As I lie at full length⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But no matter!⁠—I feel</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">I am better at length.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And I rest so composedly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Now in my bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That any beholder</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Might fancy me dead⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might start at beholding me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Thinking me dead.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The moaning and groaning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The sighing and sobbing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are quieted now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">With that horrible throbbing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At heart:⁠—ah, that horrible,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Horrible throbbing!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The sickness⁠—the nausea⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The pitiless pain⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have ceased, with the fever</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">That maddened my brain⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the fever called “Living”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">That burned in my brain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And oh! of all tortures</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2"><em>That</em> torture the worst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has abated⁠—the terrible</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Torture of thirst,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the naphthaline river</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of Passion accurst:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have drank of a water</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">That quenches all thirst:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Of a water that flows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">With a lullaby sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From a spring but a very few</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Feet under ground⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From a cavern not very far</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Down under ground.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And ah! let it never</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Be foolishly said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That my room it is gloomy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And narrow my bed⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For man never slept</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In a different bed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, to <em>sleep</em>, you must slumber</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In just such a bed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>My tantalized spirit</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Here blandly reposes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forgetting, or never</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Regretting its roses⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its old agitations</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of myrtles and roses:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For now, while so quietly</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Lying, it fancies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A holier odor</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">About it, of pansies⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A rosemary odor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Commingled with pansies⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With rue and the beautiful</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Puritan pansies.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And so it lies happily,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Bathing in many</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A dream of the truth</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And the beauty of Annie⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drowned in a bath</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of the tresses of Annie.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She tenderly kissed me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">She fondly caressed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then I fell gently</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">To sleep on her breast⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deeply to sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">From the heaven of her breast.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When the light was extinguished,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">She covered me warm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she prayed to the angels</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">To keep me from harm⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the queen of the angels</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">To shield me from harm.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And I lie so composedly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Now in my bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Knowing her love)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">That you fancy me dead⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I rest so contentedly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Now in my bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(With her love at my breast)</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">That you fancy me dead⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That you shudder to look at me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Thinking me dead:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But my heart it is brighter</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Than all of the many</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stars in the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">For it sparkles with Annie⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It glows with the light</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of the love of my Annie⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the thought of the light</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of the eyes of my Annie.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-my-mother" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To My Mother<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-46" id="noteref-46" epub:type="noteref">46</a></h2>
			<p>
				<span>Because I feel that, in the Heavens above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The angels, whispering to one another,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can find, among their burning terms of love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">None so devotional as that of “Mother,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore by that dear name I long have called you⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">You who are more than mother unto me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fill my heart of hearts, where Death installed you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In setting my Virginia’s spirit free.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My mother⁠—my own mother, who died early,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Was but the mother of myself; but you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are mother to the one I loved so dearly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And thus are dearer than the mother I knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By that infinity with which my wife</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Was dearer to my soul than its soul-life.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-frances-s-osgood" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To Frances <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Osgood<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-47" id="noteref-47" epub:type="noteref">47</a></h2>
			<p>
				<span>Thou wouldst be loved?⁠—then let thy heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">From its present pathway part not;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Being everything which now thou art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Be nothing which thou art not.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So with the world thy gentle ways,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Thy grace, thy more than beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall be an endless theme of praise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And love a simple duty.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
